---
title: "Digital Literacy Narrative"
permalink: /dln/
---

As a 22-year-old university student, I embarked on a transformative journey when I took art history and interactive media courses in my freshman year. Before I even knew the term "digital humanities," I became interested in the intersection and application of digital spaces into musuem institutions and this funneled into me picking my major in art history. My personal interests slowly developed into my academic focus and have culminated into me taking the course "Intro to Digital Humanities" to learn more skills and contribute in this field some day.

Before immersing ourselves in the world of digital humanities, we had already developed our own strategies for navigating the digital landscape in both daily life and academics. As a Gen Z, I have a familiar and comforting relationship with technology and digital spaces. I grew up with the constant change and development of physical technology as well as the so called "internet culture" and many digital tools.  

My academic journey has been marked by more analog processess, and there is definitely a trend or stereotype within the humanities of being clumsy with technology and have more archaic but nostalgic practices. In classes, while many of my professors utilize online resources, some still prefer printed books or request scans from libraries. With art history specifically, there is also another challenge with images and copyright or publication; there are books or catalogs that include full images of the artworks in printed copies but their online counterpart may not, due to different applications of copyright. Even at internships, I was surprised by how analog some of these processes are and how difficult it can be to adapt to the digital age.

I have also advanced my knowledge of digital tools in specific interactive courses and personal projects. From learning to code simple programs or utilizing software like Adobe Creative Suite, I have learned many new skills through the years. A more unexpected "soft" skills was understanding the mechanisms of many digital tools and how to adapt them, like knowing how to use keywords in the best way etc, the importance of access to research databases to archive my literary and artistic sources.

The digital humanities course has illuminated my knowledge of digital tools, and has broadened and defined the scope of these tools. I have also just enjoyed learning about new digital tools, such as R, Kepler, OpenStreetMaps, Orange Data Mining, Distant Viewing Explorer and even small things like Image Downloader. Since being introduced to them in this class, I have also realized how its used across so many disciplines and that many of my peers in majors like biology or economics use daily and I feel understanding R, even in the limited capacity that we have explored in class, is a really valuable skill in professional settings. I definitely plan on using Orange in my later projects, hopefully revisiting some of my previous paper and analyses with this technique, since it fits nicely with my focus on visual culture. I also really like how the course did not get caught up with only generative tools, which are all the rage these days, and focused more on analyzing tool. I found the discussions on AI-generated content really interesting especially as we discuss some of the more innovative applications of this technology to supplement our analyses and research, rather than the common almost plagiaristic and exploitative uses. Even distinguishing between models helped me; learning that Perplexity hallucinates less made me employ it more for troubleshooting my website code or as an Google search alternative.

I enjoyed all our projects that taught many hands on skills but also the different readings that we discussed in class, which brough up a lot of new theories. Since the class also has diverse academic and cultural backgrounds, we found ourselves engaging in thought-provoking conversations that spanned our areas of expertise, enriching our perspectives and generating innovative ideas, especially when we moved into Unit 2. Learning about initiatives like Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team and working with maps was very rewarding for us, especially since they are such an active pursuit for many of our home countries. By collaborating across disciplines and backgrounds were able channel creativity and interdisciplinary thinking to make meaningful projects. My personal favourite Unit was, unsurprisingly, image data. I found the readings really interesting, especially Leonardo Impett & Fabian Offert's paper on the revolutionary potential of these tools, even while they might initially enforce existing canons. I personally have felt this way but reading these essays made me realize the exciting possibilities within this emerging field and be more critical of my own use and interest in digital technologies.

Research data management and manipulation also emerged as a common thread that united all of our different projects and approaches. We delved into text analysis, data visualization, and digital archives. While many of the projects did not require intense skills in data inputting but it did enlighten us on the nuances and complexities of quantifying or data-fying knowledge. Working with a historical document like the Zanzibar Gazette. I have personally always enjoyed data inputting and organization (both in notebooks or digitally) and I find it to be a kind of relaxing activity that can become very powerful after building archives. I enjoyed tutorial-esque readings like "Data Organization in Spreadsheets" by Karl W. Broman & Kara H. Woo since it reaffirmed many of the tricks I had picked up by trial and error in these softwares throughout my whole life (Side note: I also think this reading was a bit outdated since I think technology has become a lot smarter and recognizing human intentions with data management and exact matches etc are a bit less necessary now). The importance of data literacy transcended our individual majors, equipping us to navigate the data-driven landscape of the current digital age in all aspects of our life.

Our critical reflection on our current abilities led us to appreciate the concept of “computational thinking” in the age of AI. We understood that skills in data analysis, algorithm understanding, and result interpretation were universally valuable, regardless of our major. As AI continues to shape our world, these skills will empower us to harness its potential for innovation and informed decision-making, while also recognizing its faults or biases.

Digital humanities broadened our horizons, offering fresh perspectives on our respective fields of study. We began to contemplate the ethical implications of AI and data usage within our disciplines: computer science majors questioned the ethical responsibilities of AI developers, while art students considered the impact of AI-generated content on creativity and originality.  Unlike most of my peers, my previous experience and interest in this field meant that I had a more clear idea of what it entailed and its importance but while knowing a bit about the *why* I did not have much knowledge about the *how* and I really appreciated the balance between theory and practical application.

After wrapping up the course, it was clear how excited we are to continue our exploration of new ways of thinking and working in this field. In our last class where we presented our reflections, everyone brought their own interpretation and insights from this course and how it will affect us going forward. It was a very sweet moment and I really liked the sense of community and curiosity that it inspired. As NYUAD students, we recognize the value of interdisciplinary thinking in a digitally driven world, supported by our core curriculum and classes such as this one. This class presented a future where collaboration between artists, scientists, scholars, and creators is the norm, fostering innovation and pushing the boundaries across all our fields.

In conclusion, our journey through digital humanities has been transformative. It has expanded our horizons, bridged the gap between technology and the humanities, and equipped us with many tools and a deeper understanding of digital literacy. As we continue to navigate the digital landscape, we are poised to embrace new ways of thinking and working that promote interdisciplinary collaboration and responsible digital citizenship. The discussions on the last day also made me very invested in the future projects and trajetorites of our class, as seniors presented their post-grad ideas or underclassmen considered their Capstone proposals. In the age of AI, we are ready to holistically evaluate these technologies, reckon with its flaws while pushing for its future potential. With how quickly these technologies are growing, this course become a foundational basis for the future of university education, within our school as well as across world. 
